Hansel minutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
but weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman
hosted by Carl Franklin. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number one
44. Recorded live Tuesday, December 30th, 2008.
Support for Hansel minutes is
provided by Tellerik rad controls.
The most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers
journal the world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott talks with his
wife until guy an MBA
and homemaker from Zimbabwe. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes, week three in
Africa, actually a week three
plus one, we just got
back from Africa. Yesterday, got
off the plane rolled immediately
into bed. Very, very, very
jet lagged. We were going
to do a couple more
interviews from Africa, but a
couple of people dropped out
at the last minute. So
instead we're talking to my
wife. Hi, small wife. Hi,
how are you? I'm very
well. How are you? No
fine. I'm glad. So small
wife. This is a, this
is my podcast, by the
way. We've never done a
show with me before and
I, It's pretty interesting to
see it from this side.
You know, all I usually
hear it's get out, get
out of recording, stay quiet,
you know, gag the kids.
If you have to, for
the love of God, keep
it down, But debit. Now
you have to hold the
microphone in your hand yourself.
Oh, okay. So yeah. Keep
it close. How do I
sound? You sound fine here.
So what is your name?
Love? So, okay. My name
is , but I go
by Mo because I call
you because you call me
and people always ask me,
they're like, wow, how do
you go from dementia tomorrow?
Well, the mole is part
of my middle name. Allah.
Yeah. And so you grew
too lazy to say Mola.
Cause those two silvers was
such hard work and
I find it strange when
I call you and Tom
Benchley, that's made bizarre or
weird. So, so you're an
end belly I am. And
that is a tribe in
Zimbabwe. That is correct. Yes.
And we've got family spread
all over the, all over
the world. We've got people
who have immigrated to Tanzania.
We've got people who've immigrated
to the, the U S
like yourself. You became a
citizen a couple of years
ago. We've got people who've
immigrated to South Africa and work
there. And we had a
reunion this last couple of
weeks. You are four of
seven. And when you always
say four seven, I don't
know if people know that
you mean the fourth child
of seven. Yes. Yes. Well,
I mean, people who watch
star Trek will recognize what,
what that means, but yes,
you are four of seven.
You're not seven of nine,
seven of nine. You're four
of seven, Which I always
say it's like, it's at
nine 11. Exactly. No, you're,
you're four of seven. So
we went and we, we
stayed in the house of
two of seven and, and
spend time with, with the
other six or seven. Right?
So you are coming up
on your, what I'm calling
your halvsies party, which is
when you will have been
half here and half there,
which I think is a
particularly interesting thing. You came
to the States when 92.
Yeah. So that's what it
was that you were 18,
18. So you're coming up
on the half and half.
And you came to Las
Vegas. When you came here,
New Mexico, Las Vegas, New Mexico, were
you disappointed? I was, I
thought I was being kidnapped.
I think I told you
this, that, you know, when
I heard Las Vegas, I
was expecting Nevada. And imagine
my surprise when I got
tiny, tiny Las Vegas, New Mexico
that I had never heard
of. And I immediately thought
I'm being kidnapped. Oh God,
I did. I did. I
mean, I just bamboozled and
somehow I could not imagine
a country having two cities
with the same name. It
was bizarre, strange. So who
does that? You know, so,
Well, we do 18 there's
18 Portland's I stopped counting
up to three. I was
like, okay. So, and this
has been an interesting thing
in our relationship. I think
because people usually say, Oh,
well, you know, you're white
and your wife's black. You
must have lots of trouble
with color and this and
that. And I've always said,
you might as well be
purple. The fact is that
you're, you're African and it's
the cultural differences that are
the trouble. Many of you
is as color, been an
issue for us as much
as culture, For instance, a
couple less. So I think,
but, but you're right. I
mean, people see us and
they see the obvious stuff
first, obviously. Right? My Judy
and just the general poker
today of, of cancer. That's
right. That's right. You know,
they wonder, you know what
you're doing with me? And
all I understand are we
taping this because I've got
to recant, right? Yeah. They
see the skin color. But,
but they, they assume like,
for example, I'll meet people
who are, who are African
American in a mixed relationship
with element, I assume. Yeah.
Yeah. That, and they don't
know that, that a lot
of the stuff that we
argue over really is, I
mean, cultural stuff, you know,
the way you were raised
and how wrong that way
he is. And you know
how I'm helping you see
the light kind of thing.
Now, you know, one of
our very first arguments, cultural
arguments was I think one
of the second or third
time we were going to
see my parents, if you
remember correctly were on the
freeway. And I, and you
said, I said, we're going
to stop by my parents.
And you said, well, we
need to get something. We
need to get some bread
because it was dinner time.
And I said, no, no,
no, you don't need to
get any bread. And you
said, no, we're going to
get bread. Or I'm going
to open the car door
and I'm going to roll
out under the freeway and
get the bread myself. You
were very strongly felt very
strongly about that. Why is
that so important? Actually, that,
that wasn't an African thing.
That was the American thing.
I had observed that a
lot of Americans, when they
come, first of all, they
call before they come, you
know, they, they don't just
show up, which, you know,
you were just in South Africa,
was staying with my brothers.
And what have you, Andrew
saw that. I mean, people
just stroll in casually and
they give very little thought
to whether it's convenient or
inconvenient for, for their host.
You know, their goal is
we're here to see you
and we're happy to be
with you. And whether we're
coming right at dinner time,
is there trying to eat
a meal? Oh, well, you
know, so that concern for
me was what I'd observed.
Other Americans around me doing
you call first and you
bring something you don't just
show up. So it was
troublesome to me that we're
going to do this to
your parents where we're going
right at dinner time and
just kind of strolling in
empty handed. You know, my
impression of that is that
it's okay for children. You
know, if, if, if, if
all boys were to come
over and see us, that's
fine. Then they're little, but
adults working, adults who are
competent and self-sufficient probably should
do something. So it bothered
me that you insist and
let me know. Well, I
wasn't insisting that we not,
it was just like, Oh,
another place to stop to
get more stuff. So Africans
don't bring stuff every time
they come over, it seems
like they do. No. I
mean, really, honestly, we don't,
we take step one, we're
going to see somebody at
the hospital, obviously, because they're
not able to, you know,
get out there themselves. But
for the most part I'm
and you saw this, people
just showed up. Oh yeah.
Well, we had, we had
a house of what, six
or seven people. And then
it would, we would blink
and suddenly a cousin would
come over our second cousin
and then they would bring
their wife and their four
kids. And the next thing
you know, we've got 15
in a house. Exactly. And
just when you know, it
always seems like it's at
an inconvenient time, we're serving
dinner for those that we
knew were going to be
there. And wouldn't, you know,
it right. As people sitting
down to eat in walks
seven other people, and it's
like, Oh crap. You know,
but somehow food's always found
you, you make, do with
whatever little is there. You,
you cut it into, into,
into quarters. If that doesn't
work into AIDS, you know?
Well, it's interesting because no
one ever actually said, I
mean, we were there a
month and no one said,
do you mind if we
stay for dinner or is
there enough? You know, I
don't want to impose that
was never said, people just
sat on the couch and
then a plate appeared. Right.
Right. And sometimes the plate
had, you know, a whole
bunch of food and sometimes
the plate had very little
food, but there was always
a plate. And there's always
food. You know? Now when,
when you brought, when you
bring the plate, when people
come over, I noticed that
people, and of course, I've
noticed this for the last
10 years. So I'm speaking
a little bit, like this
is new to me, but
for the purposes of the
interview, someone would bring a
pitcher of water, a towel,
and then a big bowl
and you would wash the
hands of the, of the
guests. And it seemed like
that only happened when new
people had come over. Like,
we didn't do that every
day when we were just
hanging out, but an uncle
would come over and auntie,
and then that would, that
would come out. Yeah. Well,
in part, it also depends
on a, you know, where
the person's been. Right. So
if somebody has been working
in the car and then
don't come in, it's dinner
time. Yeah. You're going to
offer them that, that, you
know, to watch their hands
and what have you, the
equivalent, I mean, it happens
all the time, wash up
before dinner type of thing.
But it also, depending on
what we're eating, right. If
we're eating what we call
in Zim sides, right side,
the cornmeal, you use your
hands to do that. So
you would definitely offer everybody
their hands, you know, to
have them wash their hands
so that they are clean.
Right. Because they're going to
eat, but it's also just
out of respect, you know,
that you'd say, man, wash
your hands. And sometimes they
say, no, you know, my
hands are clean and that's
fine. But you would, there
was a, there was a
pecking order for lack of
a better word, because it
was always one of the
young women in the house
that would do the washing.
Right. It wasn't ever the
home, our host, your brother.
It was never me. And
when you would walk around
and bring the water, you
did it. And there's kind
of an unspoken order, right?
Like, let's say, let's say
that it's me, your mom
and an uncle. Who's really
old. Probably the uncle would
go first and then your
mom and then me, how
do you figure those things
out? I mean, is that
because I was in my
mind trying to work out
the business rules, you know,
how I was writing the
program to figure it out.
And I was like, Oh,
they picked her first. Oh,
okay. Is that because she's
older because she's a woman
now, how do those things
get figured out? Well, I
mean, I would still argue
that Africa really is a
male dominated society, you know?
And people don't always agree
with that, but, but I
think so when you see
this and whether it's it's,
you know, the way you
watch people's hands, whether it's
the, the, the cuts of
meat, if you've got chicken
that you cooked, right. Who's
going to get the bigger
piece of chicken. What's not
going to be the wife
who did the cooking. It's
not going to be the
kids. It's usually to go
and beat the head of
the household, the mail, the
big piece of chicken. Yep.
Absolutely. Absolutely. You know, that
still happens today. It's it
still does it still does
I still do it? Yeah.
I don't know why you
take the big chicken, As
I said, the brains behind
that Stealing chicken for me
dare with that about Yeah.
But, but you're right, absolutely.
That it is going to
be an age thing. And
then from the age thing,
it's going to be respect.
So in gender though, too,
and gender. Yeah. Right. There
were two old people, wife
and husband. You do the
man first. Yeah. Is that
fine? Just, you know, it's,
it's what I grew up
with. So I never really
questioned it too much. That
just was the way it
was. And as much as
the women were the ones
that were doing the cooking
and the cleaning every night,
you, you saw that, you
know, and a couple of
times you tried to come
in and help and it
made other women feel very
uncomfortable. That was weird. That's
happened also eight, nine years
ago when we went there
the first time, because my
family, I think it was
like day two in Zimbabwe.
That very, very, very first
trip. And I was like,
all right, dinner's ready. Do
you know, should be dinners
done. Rather let's do the
dishes because this is what
my dad does. You know,
my dad, right. We did
a show with my dad.
He would roll up his
sleeves and let's start doing
the dishes. No ladies, everybody,
ladies sit down, the men
have got this and he'd
make a big, big thing
about the man or doing
the dishes. And we do
it. You guys kicked me
out of the, out of
the kitchen. Well, Hey, you
were in the way bumbling
around. So thank you. Appreciate
that. But, but you're right.
I mean, it it's, it
was very odd. They didn't
know what to do with
you. They, they didn't really
know what your role was
there. And it was kind
of like, what is it
that he needs? Let's help
him get it, but he
can leave, but kept offering
me drinks. Yeah. It's like,
Oh, you're obviously looking for
something, right, Kitchen. Well, you
know, they ended up setting.
This is the thing that
they ended up sending me
outside to make fire with
the other men. And all
we were doing out there
was arguing about how best
to rearrange the woods, such
to make this BBQ successful
while we're toiling away for
three, four hours. Yeah. Your
guys are mopping the kitchen.
And we're trying to figure
out whether the cardboard goes
on top or underneath the
wood. It's very high tech.
And yet I would want
to say that, I mean,
men, weren't very hard to,
you know, if, if you
look at my brother and
his wife, I mean, he's
doing a lot of work
himself is, is, are you,
you know? And so is
she, it's, it's a balance.
It's a different balance. Yeah.
Right. I mean, she, she
would wake up four or
five in the morning, come
out, set up breakfast and
then go back to sleep.
And then for us, as
the people who woke up
at eight, it was a
miracle. Food was, we went
to bed, there was no
food. We woke up, there
was food, no one was
seen. And that was what
she did. But at the
same time, your brother, her
husband would, would get up
at 11 or 12 at
night to go and pick
up his brother from work
and then drop him at
his house because he didn't
have a car. So it
was different work, but it
was, it was equal that
they're definitely a house where
they're working equally hard. Yeah.
Everybody's pulling their weight. It's
a different kind of weight
than what you and I
are doing here. Yeah. Yeah.
Did they have any trouble
with, with me coming into
the family at all? Or
was it, I mean, from
the color perspective or was
it again, just cultural stuff?
Like, this is just a
weird guy, as opposed to,
this is a weird white
guy. Well, I mean, you
know, can we say this
on your show? That's right.
I don't know, what are
we going to say? Right.
Yeah. We can always edit
this. Right? No, the, the,
one of the things that
have no knowledge of young
was we had an uncle,
you know, I don't know
if it was a drunkard
per se, but he considered
himself like a visionary, somebody
who could see into the
future. And he called it,
you know, for me, he
just said, one day I
must've been 11 or 12.
Oh, you're going to marry
somebody, a foreigner, somebody not
from here. You know, we
didn't think it was going
to be a white guy,
but that was always out
there for me. So when
I left and came to
the States, I think that
seated long, been planted, even
though we dismissed it, what
did he know? You know,
he wasn't really much of
anything. That's the Sancho. I
mean, it's not like any
other things that he said
came true, but nevertheless, he
had said it, you know,
he explicitly, while we're having
dinner one day just, It
is really happening. I mean,
as I've heard this story
before and your sister, the
eldest child, your sister actually
gave this speech at our
wedding. And I was like,
ah, this is his story.
No, it is actually, it
didn't happen yet. So were
they surprised when I married
you? Yeah, there was surprised,
but was it a total
shock? No. It, and again,
I think the big issue
for them wasn't so much
erased. And as much as
it was, I had long
been saying I was never
going to marry, not just
an American, but a foreigner,
because I always wanted to
go back home to Zimbabwe.
Cause I always wanted to
go back and be with
my people and help them
out. That's why I was
getting an education. Right. So
I could go back home
and make a difference. And
all of a sudden here
I am saying, I'm getting
married to you. And it's
like, well, what do you
do with that? All that
feeling that you've had in
the past about, I want
to go back home on
and go back home, you
know, because I'd always wanted
to avoid making somebody choose
between me and my people
in my home and you
know, you and your people
in your home. So that
was, it was a difficult
choice. I had expressed it
as being a very difficult
choice and one that I
wasn't willing to make to
have anybody make on my
behalf. So they were surprised.
I mean, they were, they
were stunned. Yeah. And I
remember that you were concerned
even when we were getting
married, that you would have
to sneak assistance to the
family. I mean, you would
kind of confided in me
after the fact, once we
found that, that it was
going to be a non
issue that you were concerned,
well, all right, I'm married,
I've made this decision. I
married this guy, but I'm
still going to have to
sneak my own money to
the family to help them
because he's going to lose
patients quickly. Yeah. I mean,
it's, it's a hard, it's
a hard thing. You know,
when you're one of seven,
I was raised with a
very clear expectation that we
take care of ourselves and
we take care of each
other. And I didn't really
think that that was something
that a lot of Americans
were familiar with. I mean,
no disrespect to, you know,
to your listeners, but it
is such a burden is
the wrong word for it.
But it is maybe an
obligation. It is this thing
that you're raised with this
idea that take care of
yourself and take care of
your siblings and your parents.
You say something about wound
too, as a concept. Yeah.
I mean, one, two is
exactly that the, the, the,
the, the way of being,
I guess, I really, I
failed to find English people
through other people. Yeah. But
you are no one without
your other people. Right. Right.
I mean, that's a song
that you're referencing,  South
African singer, but absolutely. ,
that's pretty much the same
thing. You know, you, you
are who you are because
of other people. So in
their absence, you are nothing
type of thing. And so
I didn't think that would
be something that my American
husband would understand. I just
didn't think it was a
concept that you are going
to be familiar with, but
it wasn't something that I
was willing to give up.
So in my mind, it
was like, well, I'm a
working individual, you know, I'm
bringing in money, I'll find
a way to get the
necessary funds to my family.
And of course, thankfully it
was a nonissue because of
how you were raised, as
it turned out that, you
know, you do have similar
values, et cetera, et cetera.
But I didn't expect that.
I mean, before we got
married, I really, I really
didn't expect that understanding because
it is, it is a
hard, it's not a, it's
not a short thing, you
know, it's, it goes on
in perpetuity or yeah. Not
just the life commitment to
you, but it's a life
commitment to, to the other,
the other seven people and
exactly India kids and their
kids and their kids. So
it's, it's ongoing and it's
it's work. And it's not
just, I mean, to be
clear, it's not necessarily Monetary,
but it's to make sure
that you're calling everyone and
checking in and making sure
that everyone's okay. It's not
about writing checks and throwing
money over the wall. It's
bad. It's, it's, it's emotional
support. It's spiritual support. It's,
you know, if they need
you, are you there type
of thing. Do you know
how to make the possible
out of the impossible? Well,
the dotnet ninjas at Telerik
do they just released a
huge pack of web controls,
all built on top of
ESPN at Ajax, that'll help
you build impossibly fast and
interactive applications in no time
at all. They've made the
impossible possible in desktop development.
If you think you can't
have a carousel component and
wind forms, well, you can,
their windows forms, suite features
a super powerful grid view
control on 32 other crazy
desktop components that will give
you a dazzling WPF like
features, but in wind farms,
they do the same thing
in reporting solutions with a
new design surface, like nothing
else looks just like graph
paper gives you advanced page
layout capabilities makes it feel
more like a graphic design
software than a reporting solution.
Go check them out@telerikdotcomandbeat.net Ninja.
Thanks for listening. And one
of the things that I'm
consistently having trouble with when
I am overseas or interacting
with your family is this
idea of, of honesty versus
diplomacy. And one of the
people on our blog on
the blog, one of the
commenters on the blog said
that this is the difference
between me having IQ and
you having EEQ or another
way to phrase it is
that I'm a socially backward
programmer who doesn't know my
ass from a hole in
the ground. And you are
a, you know, a subtle
and thoughtful member of society.
Has that idea of being,
being straight with people versus
being, being diplomatic while still
getting the message across and
an issue for us. Yeah.
I think it has been
an issue for us at
that. You're going to ask
if it's been an issue
just for me in general,
it has been, I mean,
I remember when I first
came to the States, I
found people who very, very
abrupt, you know, people would
just say, Hey, can you
do X, Y, Z for
me? And I think, good
grief. You just don't care
about me at all. Do
you? There's no. Hello, how
you doing? You know, how's
the day treating you? None
of that. There was just
always exactly no plan. And
I found a very abrupt,
you know, so I did
have a bit of trouble
with that. And I think
you and I have gone
back and forth on this
issue of, you know, you
want something, but care a
little bit about me, the
person you're talking to enough
to value my wellbeing before
you value, whatever it is
that you want from me.
You know? So it's, it's
been difficult. But what I
found very interesting is as
we've been married and over
the years, as I've gone
back, people say that I
am just as abrupt now,
as they would find you,
which I'm shocked, I'm stunned,
how's that possible. You know,
And that gets back to
the idea that you're half
here and half there. And
you don't. I always feel
like when we go there
and we try to go
to Africa every year or
two, that you reassert your
Africanness, you with all due
respect there, you tend your
accent switches back. You start
to hit words differently. You
start to kind of move
the needle in the other
direction a little bit, and
the extra African do you
consciously do, do you have
any conscious understanding of, of,
of maybe doing that of
reasserting arena, putting, basically putting
your stamping your foot in
the ground and just kind
of pushing a little harder
to make sure that you
remember where you came from?
You know, I, I don't,
you're not the only person
that has pointed that out.
I remember that a couple
of our cousins just a
couple of weeks ago were
saying the same thing. It's
not a conscious thing that
I do, obviously I do
it cause even they heard
it, they're saying, well, you
know, I'm not the only
one. Cause you've told me
for years that I was
insane. And this was just
me. I actually remember, you
know, being, being, being an
engineer, you actually recorded it
at one point in time.
And when you played it
back to me, I could
hear it. But in the
moment, no. Okay. Right. Well,
that's the accent. I mean,
the accent thing is easily,
is easily proven. You know,
when you're talking in your
language, which is really kind
of like, I don't know,
it's kind of like Spanglish
in the sense of it's
half end of Ellie and
half English, because you use,
you use a lot of
borrowed words, your languages, there's
a lot of foreign words.
Those borrowed words are said
explicitly in, in the underbelly
accent, but I'm thinking more
of the, you know, personality
stuff, you know, you're even
more deferential to elders when
you're there. I mean, you
really are. When in Rome
do as the do, as
the Romans do, But to
be clear, I mean, I
think it's the amplification of
who I am is what
you're getting at there because
I do believe, and in,
in being differential to elders,
even here, when, when I'm
away from that, you know,
but, but yeah, it probably
is just a desire to
just blend in and not
be, you know, what's been
interesting about our lives from
a race point of view
is that when we're in
the States, I'm typically the
one that stands out because
Oregon has so few black
people, for instance. But when
we get to whether it's
symbolic, where South Africa, you know,
like we're just in introvert,
you know, went to the
mall and you were one
of them, We didn't just
go to them all. We
went to the Soweto mall
Ponya mall, which is not
just the black mall, but
it's like know black mall
in Soweto. Yeah. There was
me and one other guy
And he didn't show up.
He didn't have, we didn't
even see him for awhile.
So it was very interesting
to me to have you
be the one now that's
sort of anything that you
do. You've got, you know,
15, 20, 30 pairs of
eyes that are pretending not
to be watching you, but
they're watching you, you know,
you've got a lot of
people that are listening to
you, but pretending to be,
you know, nonchalant, you're doing
something else or whatever. And
so that I think is,
is where race comes in.
But coming back to the
issue of, of, of honesty
versus diplomacy, I mean, I
think, I think you tend
to, to hit it hard,
you know, you're very, very
honest you as an individual.
And I think maybe a
lot of Americans is the
people on Insta to, and
I'm generalizing here. So they
understood, you know, whereas, you
know, I was raised with
this idea that even if
I have to listen to
my grandmother, say something that
I know is absolutely wrong,
what, what, what does it
hurt me to let her
think she's right. Right. You
know, at the end of
the day, when all is
said and done, you know,
I can, in my head
know that I was right,
but give her this one
small thing. Right. And, and
so I learned to just
let a lot of stuff
go good, bad or indifferent.
It's it's, you know, certainly
I wouldn't stand there and
let her, you know, perjure
herself with something People, a
lot of you give them
a lot of time. And
this is, I think one
of the problems with not
just American women, again, Americans,
again, we continue to generalize,
but, but people are time
obsessed and I'm, I am
certainly time obsessed. So when
every time we go to
Africa and we get more
than five or 10 people
in the room, there's some
kind of a crisis might
be a little crisis. We
had a crisis where we
wanted to buy a refrigerator.
Right. And when I say
crisis, I mean, tiny lowercase
C, it was a very
simple, right. Let's buy a
fridge. You know, we got
some young, our brothers are
starting their life. They need
a fridge. From my point
of view, I, I wanted
to attack it. Like, all
right, what are the candidate
fridges? What are our candidates
ridges? I was ready to
do the whole consumer reports
right up on the fridge.
Well, I felt that you
guys were just going on
and on and on and
on and on about unrelated
on fridge related things, unrefrigerated
related things. And it made
me realize that there's this
thing that you've always told
me, cry with the crying.
And you want to say
something about what that means
cry with the crying. Well,
I mean, it's just basically
empathize really is along the
shorter fit. You know, I,
I think talking about your
personally, you tend to come
in and be very efficient,
right? And you want to
get the job done. If
you come in and you
find people, you know, sort
of lamenting that, Oh, a
hungry, you know, the fridge,
what are we going to
do? Where do we go?
Exactly. You know, whether it's
hunger, whether it's a fridge,
whether it's a call, whatever,
you know, you just sort
of want to identify the
problem, you know, and attack
it and just handle it.
Right. I found in Africa,
that's saying, all right, everyone,
what is the very next
action? Not the best way
to attack a problem in
South Africa, at least in my
experience. And, and speaking for
specifically, just for my family.
Okay. Let's, let's go specifically
to end of LA culture,
black South Africa, your family. Yeah.
Yes. This is very likely.
I'm sure that there are
families. Yeah. That, that maybe
attack things this way. I
don't know. Maybe, maybe not,
but definitely not my finest
hour. Right. Right. I mean,
when you do that, then
you're coming in, you've taken
away. The people, you know,
that were mid discussion, your
finance in the middle of
a conversation and you just
stop everything and just kind
of like, Oh, I am
here. I have seen the
light. And let me show
you, you know, and you
don't mean it that way,
but it just has this
very it's cold water. You
know, it just stops the
discussion and leaves everybody feeling
very confused. And what ends
up happening then is that
people defer to you, you
know? And so at the
end of it all, you
know, when you then come
to me, cause I'm the
loud one, you're the loud
one. And you're the one
that's come in and sort
of asserted yourself aggressively and
said, let's get this job
done my way. And then
afterwards, when you ask them
and say, so, are you
happy with the fridge then
the pushback as well you
are. And then you're taken
aback. You're stunned. It's like,
what do you mean I
am well, sure. We did
it your way. So as
long as you are happy
with the fridge, what do
you need from me? You
know? So let's take that
concept and then let's flip
it on its year. After
you graduated with your MBA,
you went to work and
you went to work with
a very diverse crowd of
different ages and different colors
and different levels of experience.
And when it came to
sitting in a room and
solving a problem, not necessarily
getting a fridge, but procuring
something else or working through
an issue at one of
the nonprofits that you worked
at, how did your technique
and your style and your
Africanness work within the context
of a room full of
Americans? That was difficult. I
mean, I had to, there
was definitely a learning curve
for me, right. When I'm
in the office or if
I'm taking call from a,
a client, for instance. Yeah.
They may or may not
be interested in, in my
five minute, 10 minute warmup
before I get to the
real problem. There were people
that legitimately didn't have a
lot of time. They needed
things handled and handled quickly.
So it took a while,
but I guess I've always
seen a difference between a
professional setting and a social
setting. You know, I've always
made that distinction. Yeah. Whether
it be in Africa or
in America. Right, Right, right.
I mean, even, even in,
in Zim, you know, people
get things done even in
Zim. So I don't want
to imply that, you know,
it's always a bunch of
incompetent people that just, you
know, everybody's sitting around and
just kind of saying, eh,
you know, don't worry about
the time. Well, like when
I blogged about African time,
a very large number of
people who've been to Africa
immediately related, but a lot
of people felt a little
offended, a little insulted that
I was saying, Oh, well,
you're saying Africans are lazy
and late. And, and, and
know what I was trying
to say. And apparently I
failed was that Africans have
a much more fluid perception
of time, but that doesn't
necessarily mean that a business
meeting is going to be
running three, four hours late.
That's fine. That's right. It
all depends on what the
situation is. You know, I
talked about going to visit
people in the hospital. For
instance, we may leave the
house and say, okay, we're
going to visit uncle Michael,
whoever for, for 20 minutes
when we get there, if
we find that, you know,
he really is in a
bad state, for instance, I'll
be more inclined to spend
a couple of hours with
him, you know, or if
we're just having a good
time or whatever the case
may be. Whereas I would
suggest that you probably would
still sort of say, Hey,
we came in here saying,
we're going to, you know,
we're going to give it
20 minutes or 20 minutes
out. Let's go, let's do
this. You know? So it's,
I mean, it's, it's probably,
yeah. I see. I hear
examples like that are always
unfair. But I think the
point is is that if
someone in Zimbabwe were trying
to close on their mortgage,
they're going to show up
on time at the mortgage
broker for the thing. But
if there's a dinner afterwards
for five o'clock, they may
roll in at eight 30.
Right. Depending on who's hosting
the dinner, if it's, you
know, again, what the expectations
are. Yeah. First of all,
I mean, just you don't
disrespect really. That's that's the
way I was raised. So
if mom were waiting for
me somewhere, I would be
less inclined to keep her
waiting for instance, than I
would a friend of mine,
because then I would say,
Oh, you know, I was
doing this, that, and the
other thing, and Yeah, and
this goes both ways. People
are equally forgiving based on
context. Right. And, and you
saw with my brothers, for
instance, you know, that, that
leave or I'd go with
them and you'd go with
them and they'd say, I'll
be back in an hour.
And then four hours later,
they stroll back in no
apology. Well, you know, I
was, I have a lot
of trouble with that because
I always, maybe over empathize
about the other person's time.
We went to pick up
one of our cousins and
he was in downtown Joburg
and we were supposed to
pick him up at 11.
I think he got picked
up around three and I
thought he was being artificially
gracious because he was saying,
no, no, no, it was
fine. You know, we just
hung around, but this was
on, he was totally fine.
He took the opportunity of
our lateness to show his
wife around downtown. And they
spent a very leisurely and
relaxed four hours, which I
can't even conceive of a
leisurely. And for the next
four hours of waiting for
a ride to, to see
the sites, right. So it's
not just about lateness or
waiting for someone to emulate,
but it's also taking advantage
of the time to do,
to do other things, which
is consistently difficult for me
to get my brain around.
I think it's all about,
you know, how you take
it, right? If you understand
that they mean no disrespect
to me by not being
here, then you're more likely
to, to, to roll with
it and let it go.
If you assume that, Oh,
most that she was going
to be here at 11
it's 11, 10. She's still
not here. That means she
thinks my 10 minutes are
not worth much of anything.
That's a very different statement
of what she thinks. That's
right. That's right. But if
you say to me, Oh,
Scott said he was going
to pick me up at
11 it's now noon. I
know that in that hour,
whatever he was doing was
really very compelling, so much
so that he thought it
best that he take care
of that issue. Then come
here and get me. Then
when you come, I can
say, so what was going
on? And you'll probably tell
me, you know, I had
a flat tire or they
take care of the babies
or whatever. There's usually something,
you know, in that instance
that, that our cousin was
waiting for us. You know,
my brother was supposed to
pick them up. I think
it was somewhere helping somebody
else take care of and
really big. He had a
legitimate reason, legitimate thing. It's,
it's never their assumptions. Never
that you're dissing me and
you're disrespecting me. And you
think, you know, I'm not
worth anything to you. So
I think it's all about
perception. Yeah. Well, the culture
gap is consistently a challenge,
a challenge for us. I
mean, time, time is one
thing interacting with my parents
versus your parents. I know
that there was a, there's
a technique. I don't know
if it's a technicality, there's
a rule that I'm not
supposed to. If I understand
correctly, be in the same
room as your mom alone,
or I'm not supposed to
eat. Yeah. It's not, it's
not that you're not supposed
to be in the same
room with her. And this
is really old school. My
parents were not like that
even before my dad passed
away. Yeah. And so they've
let go of a lot
of stuff in there. I'm
fairly educated. So they don't
hold onto a lot of
the traditions as much as
some people might, but right.
The idea is that eating
is in delicate. So that
is something that should be
done separate from the son
in law slash the mother-in-law.
So if my mom is
eating, you should, you should
show your respect to her
by letting her eat freely
by not being in that
room, that type of thing.
So you let her eat
freely, you know, in as
much as it should take
a bathroom since you wouldn't
be in the same room,
obviously and on and on.
So it's okay. So, I
mean, it's obvious to me
in my culture that I
would not be in the
bathroom while your mom's taking
a bath. Right. Same kind
of an idea while she
is eating and smacking her
lips and doing all that
eating stuff. Right. And I
remember early, early on, we
had a little con there
was a little debate, many,
many tiny debate about, are
we going to follow these
rules? What exactly are we
going to do? And they
immediately, my parents immediately just
blew them off and said,
he can't possibly know about
these things. So, you know,
a lot of it was
just sort of waved. I
mean, even the, the bright
gift, I think you kind
of had to push to
do it because they just
said, this is not, he's
not One of us. One
of the Brian gift was
an interesting, an interesting thing,
because I knew that the
impression that I got from
your mom and dad was
that it would have been
appreciated. It was appreciated when
we did go through with
it. But I could tell
that they were hedging it
in the sense of, they
were saying, well, you know,
if this white American doesn't
want to go through our
process, let's let, let's get
him. Let's, you know, let
them off the hook. But
I had a sense that
if we didn't go through
with it, it would be
one of those little back
of the mind things 10,
20 years later, that would
be remembered, not necessarily with
negativity, but not with fondness.
They're not going to go,
Oh, we're fond of the
fact that he didn't go
through the process. So there
were, I mean, maybe speak
a little bit about the
pride gift. Cause I remember
we had to get a
blanket for your mom to
keep her warm. This was,
this is called Lobola
so yeah, I mean, Lola
basically is, is the, it's
your way of thanking my
family for taking such good
care of me and raising
me and, and all that
good stuff. And it is
in its purest form. It
really is just a way
of expressing appreciation. Obviously with
a hard economic times, it's
become corrupt. A lot of
people use it as a,
as a way to get
money and get rich kind
of quicker than, than they
would otherwise. That is not
what the original intent was.
It really was just a
way of saying, I acknowledged
that, you know, you raise
this wonderful woman and I
thank you for it. And
to be clear, this is
not a dowery in the
sense of the husband to
be received money from the
bride's parents. But rather this
is a bright gift in
that the young man who
is marrying the woman is
presenting gifts, cows and blankets
to the parents of a
prospective project B. So it's
a little bit reversed from
what you would think of
as a traditional dowery. It's
not a dowry. Right. And
I guess it depends on
your perspective. I grew up
with it being the man
does the giving. So for
me, it's you never have
to explain to me that
it's not a diary. You
know what I mean? This
is for the purposes for
the listeners. Right, right, Right.
But yeah. And, and you're
right. It used to be
called and it still is
called a kiss, the bride
price, really. But I don't
like that term because it
sort of says you're buying
something. As I said, in
its purest form, it really
is a way of expressing
appreciation and gratitude to your
future wife's family for taking
care of her. Is it
also set up as a,
a place for the bride
to fall back on? If
the relationship doesn't work out,
she can go back to
her parents and they're not
destitute, You know, I don't
know. I have to agree.
I don't know. I wouldn't
have said so, but it's,
it's entirely possible. I always
thought that it was just
as I said, that, that,
that expression of appreciation, but
there tends to be difficult.
You know? I mean, I
can't my parents, obviously, because
you weren't as involved in
and we had no way
of getting calls for you.
They, We just went with
cash because I couldn't find
cows, but we take it
the blanket, the, each Ollie
That's right. And, and we
did have, We did have
a goat and went through
that whole process, but I
gave the monetary equivalent of
a number of cows while
your brother who is marrying
a woman from Swazi land
is going through a much
more formal process with actual
cow procurement. Right. Which is
quite a challenge because, you
know, he's a, he's a
guy, he's a city guy.
Right. You know, he's a
businessman and he's got to
go and find uncles and
people who are going to
represent him and help him
to find these cows. Right.
And an ongoing process. And
it is a process. I
mean, it really is a
journey because, you know, you
could go a couple, two,
three times and be sent
back, you know, just as
a way of testing or
your determination and how, you
know, your endurance, how committed
is this guy to our
daughter, you know? And so
the first time you show
up, they may say, we
don't want to talk to
you, go away, go away.
And then they chase it
out of the house, you
know? And then you come
back again and then they
didn't chase it out of
the house again. And then
maybe the third time they'll
listen to you and welcome
you in and that type
of thing. So it's, it
is not, the process is
long and it is, but
again, everybody does it as
a, as a sign of
respect. Well, it's definitely been
a challenge with one foot
in Africa and one foot
in America. Thank you, small
wife for talking to me
today on this special edition
of Hanselman. And we will
see you again next week.
Take care.